Added the plugin guide (#3990)
temporalio/documentation: docs/develop/plugins-guide.mdx

---
id: plugins-guide
title: Plugins Guide
sidebar_label: Plugins guide
description: Best practices for creating plugins for AI Agents
toc_max_heading_level: 4
hide_table_of_contents: true
keywords:
 - ai agents
 - best practices
tags:
 - Best Practices
 - AI Agents
---

import SdkTabs from '@site/src/components';

# Plugins

> A **Plugin** is an abstraction that will let your users add your feature to their Workflows in one line. It makes it seamless for platform developers to add their own custom functionality to many Workflows. Using plugins, you can build reusable open source libraries or build add-ons for engineers at your company.

Reviewer: Maybe re-word this to be more generic than adding stuff to workflows, since you can do more than that?

Reviewer 2: What do you have in mind?

Here are some common use cases for plugins:

- AI Agent SDKs
- Observability, tracing, or logging middleware
- Adding reliable built-in functionality such as LLM calls, corporate messaging, and payments infrastructure
- Encryption or compliance middleware

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's frame the guide:

This guide will 
- introduce you to the mechanics of creating plugins 
- provide general advice for platform engineers in harnessing and maintaining Temporal's primitives such as Workflows and Activities.

## How to build a Plugin

The recommended way to start building plugins is with a `SimplePlugin`. This abstraction will tackle the vast majority of plugins people want to write.  

For advanced use cases, you can extend the methods in lower-level classes that Simple Plugin is based on without re-implementing what you’ve done. See the [Advanced Topics section](#advanced-topics-for-plugins) for more information.

### Example Plugins

If you prefer to learn by getting hands-on with code, check out some existing plugins.

- Temporal's Python SDK ships with an [OpenAI Agents SDK](https://github.com/temporalio/sdk-python/tree/main/temporalio/contrib/openai_agents) plugin

> - Pydantic plugin when it’s fixed

Reviewer 2: Yes, they've already updated!
https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic-ai/blob/757d40932ebb8ef00f25cc469ff44e9b267b1aa3/pydantic_ai_slim/pydantic_ai/durable_exec/temporal/__init__.py#L83

That's a permalink to a specific code version; not sure what the best practices are for linking out.

## What you can provide to users in a plugin

There are a number of features you can give your users with a plugin. Here's a short list of some of the things you can do and more are being added.

- [Built-in Activities](#built-in-activity)
- [Workflow libraries](#workflow-libraries)
- [Built-in Child Workflows](#built-in-child-workflows)
- [Built-in Nexus Operations](#built-in-nexus-operations)
- [Custom Data Converters](#custom-data-converters)
- [Interceptors](#interceptors)

### Built-in Activity

You can provide built-in Activities in a Plugin for users to call from their Workflows. Activities are the most common Temporal primitive and should be scoped to:

- Single write operations
- Batches of similar writes
- One or more read operations followed by a write operation

> - A read that should be memoized, like an LLM call, a large download, or a slow-polling read

Reviewer: This reads awkwardly to me. Each line sort of contradicts the last. Presumably we have advice elsewhere in the docs we can link to about what an activity should be scoped to?

This could be  just "Activities should be scoped to a small, ideally idempotent, unit of work" or something

Larger pieces of functionality should be broken it up into multiple activities. This makes it easier to do failure recovery, have short timeouts, and be idempotent.

Here are some best practices you can use when you are making Activity plugins:

- Activity arguments and return values must be serializable.
- Activities that perform writes should be idempotent.
- Activities have [timeouts](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/python/failure-detection#heartbeat-timeout) and [retry policies](https://docs.temporal.io/encyclopedia/retry-policies). To be Activity-friendly, your operation should either complete within a few minutes or it should support the ability to heartbeat or poll for a result. This way it will be clear to the Workflow when the Activity is still making progress.

> - You need to specify at least one timeout, typically the [start_to_close_timeout](https://docs.temporal.io/encyclopedia/detecting-activity-failures#start-to-close-timeout). Keep in mind that the shorter the timeout, the faster Temporal will retry upon failure. See the [timeouts and retry policies](#timeouts-and-retry-policies) to learn more.

Reviewer: Definitely seems like we should link to general advice on activities somewhere in this section at least

#### Timeouts and retry policies

Temporal's Activity retry mechanism gives applications the benefits of durable execution.
For example, Temporal will keep track of the exponential backoff delay even if the Worker crashes. Since Temporal can’t tell when a Worker crashes, Workflows rely on the [start_to_close_timeout](https://docs.temporal.io/encyclopedia/detecting-activity-failures#start-to-close-timeout) to know how long to wait before assuming that an Activity is inactive. 

> Be cautious when doing retries within your Activity because it lengthens this overall timeout to be longer than the longest possible retry sequence. That means it takes too long to recover from other causes of failure. Such internal retries also prevent users from counting failure metrics and make it harder for users to debug in Temporal UI when something is wrong.

Reviewer 2: This ended up feeling a bit long and redundant on my re-read.

```suggestion
Be cautious when doing retries within your Activity because it lengthens the needed Activity timeout.  Such internal retries also prevent users from counting failure metrics and make it harder for users to debug in Temporal UI when something is wrong.
```

Reviewer: Same deal as my above comments, not sure this whole section even needs to be here at all. We're just repeating advice we give elsewhere in the docs - none of this is specific to plugins

Follow the example for your SDK below:

<SdkTabs>
<SdkTabs.Python>
```python
@activity.defn
async def some_activity() -> None:
		return None

plugin = SimplePlugin(
	activities = [some_activity]
)
```
</SdkTabs.Python>
</SdkTabs>

> ### Workflow libraries

Reviewer 2: Hopefully the new wording makes it clearer.

> You can provide a library with functionality for use within a Workflow. Your library will call elements you include in your Plugin Activities, Child Workflows, Signals, Updates, Queries, Nexus Operations, Interceptors, Data Converters, and any other code as long as it follows these requirements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can provide a library with functionality for use within a Workflow. Your library will call elements you include in your Plugin: Activities, Child Workflows, Signals, Updates, Queries, Nexus Operations, Interceptors, Data Converters, and any other code as long as it follows these requirements:
```

- It should be [deterministic](https://docs.temporal.io/workflows#deterministic-constraints), running the same way every time it’s executed. Non-deterministic code should go in Activities or Nexus Operations.

> - It should be used in the Python [sandbox](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/python/python-sdk-sandbox).

Reviewer 2: This is python-specific.  Could we maybe do this in a tab?  Or otherwise reformat into an SDK-specific section or something?

s/used/usable/

> - It should be designed to handle being restarted, resumed, or executed independently of where or how it originally began without losing correctness or state consistency.

Reviewer 2: @tconley1428, can you provide details about how to test this by disabling the workflow cache, starting with python?  My thought is we can add a "Testing your plugin" section at the bottom and then link to that here.

- It should run quickly since it may run many times during a long Workflow execution.

A Plugin should allow a user to decompose their Workflows into Activities, as well as Child Workflows and Nexus Calls when needed. This gives users granular control through retries and timeouts, debuggability through the Temporal UI, operability with resets, pauses, and cancels, memoization for efficiency and resumability, and scalability using task queues and Workers.

Users use Workflows for:

- Orchestration and decision-making
- Interactivity via [message-passing](https://docs.temporal.io/evaluate/development-production-features/workflow-message-passing)
- Tracing and observability.

#### Making changes to your Workflow Library

Your users may want to keep their Workflows running across deployments of their code. If their deployment includes a new version of your Plugin, changes to your Plugin could break Workflow code that started before the new version was deployed. This can be due to [non-deterministic behavior from code changes](https://docs.temporal.io/workflow-definition#non-deterministic-change) in your Plugin.

> Therefore, as you make changes, you need to use [patching](https://docs.temporal.io/patching) and [replay testing](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/python/testing-suite#replay) to make sure that you’re not causing non-determinism errors for your users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, it's recommended that you set up [replay testing](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/python/testing-suite#replay) to make sure that you’re not causing non-determinism errors for your users.  If you make substantive changes, you need to use [patching](https://docs.temporal.io/patching).
```

### Built-in Child Workflows

You can provide a built-in Workflow in a `SimplePlugin`. It’s callable as a Child Workflow or standalone. When you want to provide a piece of functionality that's more complex than an Activity, you can:

- Use a [Workflow Library](#workflow-libraries) that runs directly in the end user’s Workflow
- Add a Child Workflow

Consider adding a Child Workflow when one or more of these conditions applies:

- That child should outlive the parent.
- The Workflow Event History would otherwise [not scale](https://docs.temporal.io/workflow-execution/event#event-history-limits) in parent Workflows.
- When you want a separate Workflow ID for the child so that it can be operated independently of the parent's state (canceled, terminated, paused).

Any Workflow can be run as a standalone Workflow or as a Child Workflow, so registering a Child Workflow in a `SimplePlugin` is the same as registering any Workflow.

Follow the example for your SDK below:

<SdkTabs>
<SdkTabs.Python>
```python
@workflow.defn
class HelloWorkflow:
  @workflow.run
  async def run(self, name: str) -> str:
    return f"Hello, {name}!"

> plugin = SimplePlugin(

Reviewer 2: @tconley1428 my initial reaction was that this is unrealistic, since plugins are generally designed to be reused.  I'd expect people to create a plugin class that declares the Workfows rather than make a global variable for people to use.  If you agree, can you help update the code, here and in the other examples?

Reviewer 3: It's not really clear here where the different code lives. If the plugin is defined in some library, it likely will be created via constructor or function, but there's not really any inherent problem with a global. If it is just in the user's code, it's not really clear if this is a global or a local variable in the various main functions, given that there isn't really a scope in the code example at all.

```
</SdkTabs.Python>
</SdkTabs>

### Built-in Nexus Operations

Nexus calls are used from Workflows similar to Activities and you can check out some common [Nexus Use Cases](https://docs.temporal.io/nexus/use-cases). Like Activities, Nexus Call arguments and return values must be serializable.

To register Nexus handlers in Workflows, follow the example for your SDK below:

<SdkTabs>
<SdkTabs.Python>
```python
@nexusrpc.service
class WeatherService:
  get_weather_nexus_operation: nexusrpc.Operation[WeatherInput, Weather]

@nexusrpc.handler.service_handler(service=WeatherService)
class WeatherServiceHandler:
  @nexusrpc.handler.sync_operation
  async def get_weather_nexus_operation(
    self, ctx: nexusrpc.handler.StartOperationContext, input: WeatherInput
  ) -> Weather:
    return Weather(
      city=input.city, temperature_range="14-20C", conditions="Sunny with wind."
    )

plugin = SimplePlugin(
  nexus_service_handlers = [WeatherServiceHandler()]
)
```
</SdkTabs.Python>
</SdkTabs>

### Custom Data Converters

A [Custom Data Converter](https://docs.temporal.io/default-custom-data-converters#custom-data-converter) can alter data formats or provide compression or encryption.

> Note that you can use an existing Data Converter such as `PydanticPayloadConverter` in your Plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that you can use an existing Data Converter such as, in python, `PydanticPayloadConverter` in your Plugin.
```

To add a Custom Data Converter to a Plugin, follow the example for your SDK below:

<SdkTabs>
<SdkTabs.Python>
```python
def add_converter(converter: Optional[DataConverter]) -> DataConverte
  if converter is None or converter == temporalio.converter.DataConverter.default
    return pydantic_data_converter
  # Should consider interactions with other plugins, 
  # as this will override the data converter.

>   # This may mean failing, warning, or something else

Reviewer 2: @tconley1428 Should we do something a bit more formal here?  Like show adding a converter to interoperate with peoples' codecs?

Reviewer 3: ```
def _data_converter(converter: Optional[DataConverter]) -> DataConverter:
    if converter is None:
        return DataConverter(payload_converter_class=OpenAIPayloadConverter)
    elif converter.payload_converter_class is DefaultPayloadConverter:
        return dataclasses.replace(
            converter, payload_converter_class=OpenAIPayloadConverter
        )
    elif not isinstance(converter.payload_converter, OpenAIPayloadConverter):
        raise ValueError(
            "The payload converter must be of type OpenAIPayloadConverter."
        )
    return converter
```
Is our current implementation. We could do so to demonstrate it, but the desires of various payloads may vary.

  return converter

plugin = SimplePlugin(
  data_converter = add_converter
)
```
</SdkTabs.Python>
</SdkTabs>

### Interceptors

Interceptors are middleware that can run before and after various calls such as Activities, Workflows, and Signals. You can [learn more about interceptors](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/python/interceptors) for the details of implementing them. They're used to:

- Create side effects such as logging and tracing.
- Modify arguments, such as adding headers for authorization or tracing propagation.

To add one to a Plugin, follow the example for your SDK below::

<SdkTabs>
<SdkTabs.Python>
```python
class SomeWorkerInterceptor(
  temporalio.worker.Interceptor
):

> #  ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
):
  pass  # Your implementation
```
Just so the syntax is right.

plugin = SimplePlugin(
  worker_interceptors = [SomeWorkerInterceptor()]
)
```
</SdkTabs.Python>
</SdkTabs>

## Advanced Topics for Plugins

> If you go deeper into `SimplePlugin`, you can note that it aggregates a pair of raw Plugin classes that you can use for a higher level of flexibility: a Worker Plugin and a client Plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you go deeper into `SimplePlugin`, you'll see it aggregates a pair of raw Plugin classes that you can use for a higher level of flexibility: a Worker Plugin and a client Plugin.
```

There are a number of features you can give your users with a plugin. Here's a short list of some of the things you can do.

- [Built-in Activities](#built-in-activity)
- [Workflow-friendly libraries](#workflow-friendly-libraries)
- [Built-in Workflows](#built-in-workflows)
- [Built-in Nexus Operations](#built-in-nexus-operations)
- [Custom Data Converters](#custom-data-converters)
- [Interceptors](#interceptors)

### Built-in Activity

You can provide built-in Activities in a Plugin for users to call from their Workflows. Activities are the most common Temporal primitive and encompass small units of work such as:

- Single write operations
- Batches of similar writes
- One or more read operations followed by a write operation
- A read that should be memoized, like an LLM call, a large download, or a slow-polling read

Larger pieces of functionality should be broken it up into multiple activities. This makes it easier to do failure recovery, have short timeouts, and be idempotent.

Here are some best practices you can use when you are making Activity plugins:

- Activity arguments and return values must be serializable.
- Activities that perform writes should be idempotent.

> - Activities have [timeouts](/develop/python/failure-detection#heartbeat-timeout) and [retry policies](/encyclopedia/retry-policies). To be Activity-friendly, your operation should either complete within a few minutes or it should support the ability to heartbeat or poll for a result. This way it will be clear to the Workflow when the Activity is still making progress.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Activities have [timeouts](/develop/python/failure-detection#heartbeat-timeout) and [retry policies](/encyclopedia/retry-policies). For Activities, your operation should either complete within a few minutes or it should support the ability to heartbeat or poll for a result. This way it will be clear to the Workflow when the Activity is still making progress.
``` small nit!

- See [observability](/evaluate/development-production-features/observability) to avoid duplicating observation side effects when Workflows replay.
- Put other side effects inside of Activities or [Local Activities](/local-activity). This helps your Workflow handle being restarted, resumed, or executed in a different process from where it originally began without losing correctness or state consistency.
- See [testing your Plugin](#testing-your-plugin) to write tests that check for issues with side effects.
- It should run quickly since it may be replayed many times during a long Workflow execution. More expensive code should go in Activities or Nexus Operations.

A Plugin should allow a user to decompose their Workflows into Activities, as well as Child Workflows and Nexus Calls when needed. This gives users granular control through retries and timeouts, debuggability through the Temporal UI, operability with resets, pauses, and cancels, memoization for efficiency and resumability, and scalability using task queues and Workers.

> To explicitly define the Workflow runner for your Plugin, follow the example for your SDK below:

Reviewer 2: this is a non-sequitur.
